Real-Life Ransomware Attacks
============================

By using asymmetric encryption, attackers can use a type of malware, called Ransomware, to hold a victim’s data hostage and demand a ransom to access the data again.  Ransomware is an easy attack for hackers because the ransomware software can be bought, so, you don’t need to have any technical skills which makes it so anyone can pull them off.  With crypto in the picture, getting away with these attacks have become easier.  Most hackers ask for cryptocurrency such as bitcoin because it is hard to track (2).   Ransomware is a critical threat for businesses.  In 2021, 37% of businesses were hit with ransomware attacks and we also saw the biggest ransom paid by the company Acer, who paid out hackers $50 million.  With the increase in ransomware attacks, it is speculated that ransomware will cost $265 billion globally within the next 10 years (4).  So, let’s look at a few examples of some real-life ransomware attacks.   

In 2019, the brand-new CEO of a company called Norsk Hydro received a 4am call that their company was under a major cyber-attack that affected over 3,000 servers and thousands of computers.  This was an energy company, based out of Norway, who controlled the power for 900,000 houses a year (1).  Then in May of 2020, hackers demanded $3.6 in bitcoin for a decryption key about infecting the system of a data storage company from Colorado called Spectra Logic (7).   Then most recently, in May 2021, Australia’s Langs Building Supplies was hit with a ransomware attack that demanded $15 million in bitcoin to receive a decryption key to its encrypted data (6).  The one thing all these companies had in common:  None of them paid the ransom to the attackers.  

Norsk Hydro chose to reach out to cybersecurity professionals for guidance when hit with their ransomware attack.  They ended up having to disconnect the network and then shutting down the internal network which all cost them downed operations time.  This caused the company to work manually and had their workers doing double-time.  I was unable to find anything stating what the hackers had asked for but it had cost the company $70 million in losses in the long run.  They chose not to pay the ransom as it was not an option as stated by its policy (1).  Despite these 3 businesses who didn’t pay out, 32% of businesses do pay the ransom.  Even when the ransom is paid, they only get about 65% of their data back on average (4).  

Then with Spectra Logic, 75% of their environment was infected by the NetWalker ransomware right at the beginning of the shift to remote work due to Covid-19.  They immediately brought down their entire system by pulling plugs out in their server room and data center.  Luckily for Spectra Logic, they had backups of their data that was completely separate from their system, which meant they still had access to the encrypted data.  They even had a form of cyber insurance that would have paid them back the ransom, if they chose to pay it.  The company had to work 24/7 to get everything up and running again after about a week (7).

Then you have Langs Building Supplies who fell victim to a ransomware called Lorenz that was installed after hackers gained the system from a phishing email.  Langs also felt that paying the ransom was not an option and used recovery software that restored their system back up within hours.  This didn’t even cause much disruption in their services.  With Langs, after the attempt to block them out from their data didn’t work, they resorted to extortion and threatened to sell the data on the dark web.  While many of the staff panicked, it turned out that most of the data was ping traffic that didn’t really pose a serious risk to people’s data.  (6).  Knowing all of this, should businesses pay up or not?

The FBI had put out a statement a couple of years ago condemning the paying of ransoms and stated that it encourages hackers to keep using ransomware (3).  Which is true, this is the same reason why phishing still works.  If it’s not broke, don’t fix it.  It is believed that the difficult decision to pay ransom should be up to the board level of the organization because they will have to weigh the pros and cons of the financial ramifications of such an attack.  Only 8% of organizations who suffer ransomware attacks are able to fully recover all their data.  Besides the fact that you may not even recover your data, encouraging hackers to keep up ransomware attacks by paying is one of the worst things you can do (5).  By paying a ransom, it tells the hackers that these attacks will work, and they will continue to use them.  If companies keep paying then hackers will keep up with ransomware attacks.  So, if the best thing to do is to not pay up, then how can a business protect themselves?

The best way to protect against ransomware is by assuming that your business will 100% be hit with a ransomware attack.  You will never be able to stop an attack, but you can ensure that you have proper plans in place for when it does happen.  Just how Spectra and Langs did, having a backup of your system and data completely disconnected from the network is ideal.  You will want to ensure the backup is safe because ransomware software will try to target the backups, so you are unable to recover the data (9).  The Center for Internet Security also expresses the importance of not only having backups but to regularly test them and to keep multiple copies as well when securing the networks and systems.  They also suggest having an incident response plan so everyone knows what to do when they realize they are infected by ransomware.  The best thing you can do is not panic and by having a plan in place helps ensure that.  Like usual, using antivirus, anti-spam, and keeping everything updated is going to be a great method of prevention.  CIS also suggests keeping all your systems patched by a centralized patch management system.  CIS explains that using allow-lists for applications, applying lease privilege, and categorizing/separating data would all be great mitigation efforts in the fight against ransomware.   CIS also suggest training for end users that include reporting plans to ensure employees know how to respond to possible attacks.   (8).

Due to experts suggesting to not pay the ransoms, there will be an increase in data leak threats.  When Langs recovered their system so quickly with their backups, the attackers turned around threatening to leak data unless the ransom was paid.  Fortunately, the data wasn’t anything worth leaking.  It is one thing to wipe your hands of some encrypted data and starting fresh, but a whole different thing when it comes to sensitive information being leaked.  This sensitive information could end up being the company’s financial information, information of millions of people, copyright information, and so on.  So not only with there be a big issue in the future when it comes to more and more ransomware going after data leaks, but there will also be a shift in needing to figure out how to deter these attacks and how to deter companies from paying up.  When a company looks at a ransomware attack, they will have to evaluate the risks and costs associated with them.  They will have to figure out if restoring the system would be more costly or if letting millions of people’s data leak would be the worst situation.  Cybersecurity professionals will have to figure out how to keep company’s from paying ransoms when it involves the leaking of personal information.  There’s no solution for this right now and most warnings that go against paying all seem as if you have a backup, you will be fine.  However, a backup won’t do anything if a data leak happens.  



References
----------
1. Austin, P. L. (2021, July 14). How one company refused to let its Cyberattackers win. Time. Retrieved January 29, 2022, from https://time.com/6080293/norsk-hydro-ransomware-attack/ 
2. Business home. McAfee. (n.d.). Retrieved January 29, 2022, from https://www.mcafee.com/enterprise/en-us/security-awareness/ransomware.html 
3. FBI. (2020, April 3). Ransomware. FBI. Retrieved January 29, 2022, from https://www.fbi.gov/scams-and-safety/common-scams-and-crimes/ransomware 
4. Kochovski, A. (2022, January 3). Ransomware statistics, trends and facts for 2022 and beyond. Cloudwards. Retrieved January 29, 2022, from https://www.cloudwards.net/ransomware-statistics/ 
5. Moore, S. (2021, October 10). Ransomware payments – should companies pay or not? Gartner. Retrieved January 29, 2022, from https://www.gartner.com/en/articles/when-it-comes-to-ransomware-should-your-company-pay- 
6. Palmer, D. (2021a, December 17). This company was hit with ransomware, but didn't have to pay up. here's how they did it. ZDNet. Retrieved January 29, 2022, from https://www.zdnet.com/article/this-company-was-hit-with-ransomware-but-didnt-have-to-pay-up-heres-how-they-did-it/ 
7. Palmer, D. (2021b, March 25). This company was hit by ransomware. here's what they did next, and why they didn't pay up. ZDNet. Retrieved January 29, 2022, from https://www.zdnet.com/article/this-company-was-hit-with-ransomware-heres-what-they-did-next-and-why-they-didnt-pay-up/ 
8. Ransomware: Facts, threats, and countermeasures. CIS. (2019, September 27). Retrieved January 29, 2022, from https://www.cisecurity.org/blog/ransomware-facts-threats-and-countermeasures/ 
9. Yasar, K. (2021, December 15). 10 critical steps to take after a ransomware attack. MUO. Retrieved January 29, 2022, from https://www.makeuseof.com/ransomware-attack-steps-to-take/ 


