Social Engineering Attacks: An Analysis of Online Scams and How to Combat Them
==============================================================================

A major threat to network security are social engineering attacks.  Social engineering attacks are also known as “human hacking” and continues to state that it “is the art of tricking employees and consumers into disclosing their credentials and then using them to gain access to networks or accounts” (6).  In 2019, the FBI’s internet crime division was receiving an average of 1,300 complaints per day.  The combined losses from such crimes, according to the FBI, ran upwards of $3.5 billion and phishing was the most frequently reported complaint.  According to the FBI, the other common scams included non-payment scams, non-delivery scams (8).  Since the Covid-19 pandemic has spread around the world people all over have switched over to remote learning and remote work.  Due to this major shift in how the world has been coping with a pandemic, the Federal Trade Commission has witnessed a spike in social engineering attacks (12).  What is the best method to prevent social media attacks?  This paper will analyze social engineering attacks and methods of prevention.  This author believes a combination of countermeasures along with layers of protection would provide the most amount of safety.     

Hackers that use social engineering attacks will use forms of deception and manipulation to prey on people who are too trusting, too corporative, or too curious.  People can be easily hacked which poses quite a challenge for cybersecurity professionals because when hackers are given authorized access it is hard for any type of IT security system to give any protection.  People can be tricked to opening malicious emails, clicking on malicious links, or giving out any personal information that could be used fraudulently.  A study conducted in 2013 that 30% of its participants would open e-mails even when they were aware that they were suspicious or possibly contained a virus.  In 2013 James Comey, The Director of the FBI, testified that cyber-attacks have surpassed terrorism as a major domestic threat.  This article goes over the types of social engineering attacks, it will identify why cyber-attacks are on the rise and have been advancing, and the psychological contributes that may cause the vulnerabilities in people (6).  

One article lists five common social engineering attacks.  These attacks include phishing, pretexting, baiting, quid pro quo, and tailgating.  Phishing is a type of scam that relies on someone trying to retrieve personal information such as name, address, social security number, and so on.  This may typically rely on a form of urgency to influence and cloud the victim’s decision making and judgment by willingly giving info or clicking any malicious links.  Pretexting is similar to phishing but requires a believable story along with the sense of urgency so it will influence the victim to not question the story because it appears concrete.  Baiting is also similar to the previous two attacks, but this method will lure a victim in using the promises of goods and other enticement strategies to gain log-in credentials to websites.  Quid pro quo is similar to baiting, but this method is disguised as a technical service by a hacker posing as an IT representative.  Finally, tailgating will basically “piggy-back” in order to gain access to things by posing as someone who would normally be given temporary access to systems that they don’t have access to in order to release malware (6).  

Another article stated there are two categories of social engineering attacks.  The two categories are hunting and farming.  Hunting is an approach where the person doing the attacking tries to do so with the least amount of interaction with their targets.  Farming, on the other hand, involves the attacker creating some sort of relationship with the target.  Sometimes this category will lead to blackmailing or bribing if the target figures out what the attacker is onto (4).  While there are different categories and types of social engineering attacks, the two main categories that people can understand easily are human-based and computer-based attacks.  These categories are pretty clear-cut as in human-based involves human interactions and computer-based.  The human-based will involve a small target base as the hacker has to focus on their victims one at a time but will also have the opportunity to mold, shape, and change their tactic depending on their victims’ responses.  The computer-based, or software-based, tactics will involve using technology and other devices to target many victims at once with generic social engineering attacks.  Phishing attacks are one of the most common social engineering attacks, as mentioned previously.  The different categories of phishing attacks include spear phishing, whaling phishing, vishing phishing, interactive voice response phishing, and business email compromise phishing.  Spear phishing involves targeting specific individuals using their names and personal information.  Whaling phishing is the same as spear phishing except their targets are more high-profile and typically the heads or management of a company.  Vishing is just a phishing attack that is done over the phone.  Interactive voice response phishing relies on a voice response system to get their targets to enter sensitive information.  Finally, the business email compromise phishing targeting the higher-ups in a business and gaining their sensitive information to perform other social engineering attacks while posing as the original target.  While phishing is popular, it is far from being the only social engineering attack that gets used.  Pretexting attacks refer to the creation of made-up scenarios to gain a victim’s personal information.  Baiting attacks are phishing attempts that trick people into clicking links for free stuff.  Tailgating is popular as well and refers to basically piggybacking off someone else’s authorized access to gain unauthorized access.  Ransomware has become a big problem for individuals and businesses.   After a hacker has installed malware, they will hold the victim ransom by demanding money to either not release sensitive information that was found and/or will demand a ransom to be given back the access that was taken away from the victim in the first place.  Fake software attacks rely on using fake websites to receive a victim’s login information.  A reverse social engineering attack will create a problem to pose as a member of network security to help fix the problem when what they are doing is simply stealing whatever information they can get out of the victim.  Robocalls have been an issue and continue to be an issue with social engineering attacks.  Robocalls involves sending out mass “spam” phone calls using a device to automatically dial out phone numbers.  Other schemes, tricks, and attacks include impersonating help desk, dumpster diving, quid pro quo, diversion theft, shoulder surfing, document theft, and pharming attacks (10).

There are many motivations for hackers when it comes to social engineering attacks.  One reason is for the thrill and thrill alone.  Some even make a hobby of it because they love a challenge and the thrill.  Some hackers may even be seeking validation from peers or pressure from peers to perform the hacking.  Then of course there are the hackers that are in this for financial gain, which is one of the biggest motivators for hackers of social engineering attacks.  Hackers will do this for money by stealing credit card numbers, stealing financial statements, or even the use of blackmail.  Some financial gains may be quick and clear cut, as in taking money right out of their accounts immediately, while some instances could be a more complicated process that involves stealing corporate documents to sell to competitors of that company.  Hackers will also use their skills to show they have power over their targets and the defenders.  Some higher-skilled hackers may offer to sell their services of distributing spam, eavesdropping, or even cracking passwords.  Some hackers love the thrill that is involved with battling challenges that come along with finding new vulnerabilities within someone’s system, developing new attack codes, or even discovering security breaches.  The risk of being caught is also an exciting thing for many hackers.  Everyone is susceptible to becoming a victim to a hacker.  Easy targets will always be a favorite of hackers because they want a quick and easy payoff, which makes phishing attempts so enticing.  While easy targets are sought after, there are still hackers that would prefer targets that create challenges for them in order to test and enhance their hacking skills (11).  

One article explains that while there have been many attempts to help to end information security breaches, that the economy globally spends more than $445 billion annually to cover the costs of cybercrime.  The different methods these social engineering hackers use evolves over time and will adapt to changes, challenges brought on by cybersecurity professionals, and become more sophisticated.  One appeal for cyber-crimes is being able to commit theft while being anonymous which makes it harder to find, arrest, and prosecute many hackers throughout the world.  (6).  

There hasn’t been any technological countermeasures to date have been able to eliminate human vulnerability.  When people are given alternatives that they didn’t consider before a hacking situation, it may cloud their judgment because they are no longer positive that this could be a scam.  Women were also found to be more likely to open suspicious emails from social networks while men were prone to opening emails that involved power, money, or sex.  Researchers have also found by using emotional reactions such as fear and excitement, that those emotions will cloud the victim’s judgment as well.  Studies have shown that corporate-ran education helps reduce the success rate of social engineering scams (6).  

There have been 211,000 reports of online scams to the Federal Trade Commission between January and September of this year.  After the shift from school and work to remote-based plans for schools and worksites, a spike in social engineering attacks began in April.  The most popular Covid-related scam involves online shopping and the median loss for victims were around $300.  (12).  Some scams that are gaining popularity due to Covid are using platforms used in Telecommuting, such as Skype or Zoom, by sending out fake meeting links to gain login information.  Human error results in the most errors, 90% to be exact, when it comes to social engineering attacks.  There has been such an influx in social engineering attacks since the Covid-19 pandemic that Google reportedly was blocking 18 million Covid-19 phishing emails daily (9). 

When it comes to human-error, another study used a simple 20-question survey asking questions regarding simple steps in assuring cyber security, such as if they used the same password throughout different social media platforms.  Their survey found that 69% of respondents used the same login information between different email platforms.  Oddly, they also found that 62% of respondents reported that they didn’t use the same login information between email services and social media sites.  Another question asked respondents for their most-used password and 83% of them gave their password.  After analyzing the given passwords, they found that 52% of those passwords were not strong passwords.  The conclusion of this study found that the respondents don’t manage their personal login information correctly showing how easy it is for people to fall victim to social engineering attacks (7).

Being able to prevent social engineering attacks is difficult but is also is an important issue to help combat the risk associated with them.  Some defenses against social engineering attacks include education, training, increasing awareness of such attacks, providing tools and technology to combat these attacks, learning to keep your information safe, reporting suspected social engineering attacks, making sure new employees are given security orientation, among other similar ideas.  It is also suggested to start the cybersecurity training as early as possible by introducing education into K-12 schools.  The more this type of information is embedded into their heads, the better for everyone in the long run once they become apart of the adult-world.  There are many specific preventions used to combat against social engineering attacks.  For example, to fight against vishing attacks you could verify the caller with personal questions or even have a caller ID to make sure the right number is showing up for the right person.  Although, there are many hackers now that use fake calling IDs to get their victims to answer.  To help combat phishing emails a company could use a honeypot email address that would collect and give the email to employees, so they know it was a phishing attempt.  When it comes to phishing, there are anti-phishing tools, such as McAfee anti-phishing filter, Microsoft phishing filter, and Web sense, to help block and report suspected phishing web pages.  The use of machine learning algorithms in order to detect possible fraudulent websites have been found more helpful when the algorithm used an anomaly detection method.  The anomaly detection method will analyze spear phishing characteristics to determine if there is a threat.  Tailgating is a pretty simple tactic and to help this tactic it would be best to ensure that employees know not to give out any ID numbers or give any physical access to anyone who needs to piggyback off your access in order to gain their own (10).  

Any organization would do best giving their employees some sort of formal plan that is well thought out and organized while covering as much as possible.  Even when it comes to education, the employers should also be tested periodically and kept up to date with current trends in social engineering attacks and their countermeasures.  Training that makes sure that people are addressed to know that social engineering attacks will rely on human error will help people realize how important such training is.  When it comes to new employees, they must know the risks and training involved with social engineering attacks before they even have access to the systems or any sensitive information.  Due to all of this, having information security policies in place for all employees and employers involved within the company is a great beginning step.  What a policy will do is give a basic set of rules and steps for employees to follow to make sure they adhere to safe cyber practices with a possibility of them being able to detect and prevent the attacks.  Having policies implemented for all staff, vendors, and partners involved within an organization is one of the best countermeasures against social engineering attacks.  However, an organization should not end the policies after creating the policies.  These policies need to be periodically audited and kept up to date (1).  

One experiment was done showing if informing, a simulated experience, or both worked best to educate people of phishing scams.  There were 4 groups:  The control group which received no intervention, the Info group which received information for intervention, the Exp group who used a simulated experience for intervention, and the ExpInfo group which combined both information and the simulation.    A 3rd of the control group didn’t recognize the phishing email.  The groups with intervention had a drop of 7 to 9 percent in regard to visiting the phishing website given in the email.  When it came to entering a password into the phishing sites, 68% of the control group that visited the link entered their passwords.  They found that the subjects in the information only group was almost similar to the control group as 64% entered their passwords.  The Exp and ExpInfo groups were significantly lower.  The Exp group had 58% put in their passwords and the ExpInfo group had 54% put their passwords in.  The information campaign and the simulation campaign both reduced the risk significantly and lowered the risk of participants opening the phishing email.  There wasn’t much of a difference between the two.  However, the use of the information campaign along with the simulation campaign was the most effective (3).  

There are two ways to classify technical methods of protecting a device from social media attacks.  These categories are called denunciation platforms and heuristics-based solutions.  The denunciation platforms are created by developers to give web browsers updated blacklists while the heuristics-based solutions will learn and predict if features within a URL will end up being dangerous or not.  One study used Multilayer perceptron to help battle social engineering attacks.  The multilayer perceptron model would first read the URL, then it would classify the specific link into features, then it would apply an evaluation and ranking of the link, then it would add another layer of protection by combining another evaluation with a search method, then finally it would determine if the link was safe or not.  The results of this study found that there was a 98.5% accuracy in its findings (2).   

Another study used Challenge Based Learning to teach cybersecurity education by encouraging collaboration amongst peers, asking questions, developing deeper understandings of cybersecurity, and to take action with hands-on solving of real-world problems.  So these students, in the study, were able to help solve some real-world problems in regards to cybersecurity while also having the motivation of a big prize, as they were presenting in competitions.  The results of this study showed the students benefited from the Challenge Based Learning plan by improving their computer skills, security knowledge, and were also able to teach others about cybersecurity.  (5).

For the purpose of this paper, I conducted an eight question survey that I shared on social media sites such as Facebook and Instagram.  I received only 37 respondents.  This survey was just to get an idea of some simple practices regarding Cyber Security.   I used a multiple-choice format.  The questions are as follows:

1.	When you receive a link through a text message or email from a source that is unknown, how do you handle this? <br>
-a.	Don’t click the link and ignore it <br>
-b.	Click the link <br>
-c.	Go to the website/source it originated from directly (not through the link)

2.	When you receive a link through a text message or email from a source that is known (your bank, or Netflix, for examples), how do you handle this? <br>
-a.	Don’t click the link and ignore it <br>
-b.	Click the link <br>
-c.	Go to the website/source it originated from directly (not through the link)

3.	Do you use the same password across all online platforms? <br>
-a.	I use one password for all my online platforms <br>
-b.	I use multiple passwords, but some are similar <br>
-c.	All passwords are different across all online platforms

4.	Do you use personal information in your password(s)? (example: birthdate, kids’ names, pet’s name, hometown, etc.) <br>
-a.	Yes <br>
-b.	No <br>
-c.	For some passwords, but not all

5.	Do you write down any of your passwords, so you don’t forget them? <br>
-a.	Yes <br>
-b.	No

6.	Do you share any of your passwords with family and/or friends? <br>
-a.	Yes <br>
-b.	No

7.	Have you ever had someone on the internet try to scam you or trick you into giving any personal information?  <br>
-a.	Yes <br>
-b.	No <br>
-c.	I’m not sure

8.	Have you ever fallen for a scam online and lost money? <br>
-a.	Yes, Lost more than $200 <br>
-b.	Yes, Lost less than $200 <br>
-c.	No <br>
-d.	I’m not sure

My findings for this short survey didn’t show up anything I didn’t really expect to learn.  When it came to clicking links from unknown sources, 24 of the respondents said they wouldn’t click the link and would just ignore it.  However, when it came to links from known sources, 28 said they would click the link, which I thought was especially high.  32 of the respondents claimed to use the same password across all online platforms.  Of the respondents, 34 of them also claimed to have some sort of personal information in their password.  When it came to writing down their passwords, only four people claimed to have done that.  Even though only four people claimed to write their passwords down, 23 respondents claimed to give out their passwords to friends and/or family.  33 respondents claimed to have scamming attempts while on the internet but only eight have admitted to losing money falling for a scam, two of which cost the person over $200.  While the study didn’t have enough participants to garner a real result, this showed me that the general public’s cybersecurity knowledge, knowledge of online scammers, and password etiquette are seriously lacking and could use some help.

There are many limitations that need to be thought of in regard to social engineering attacks that make it hard to completely solve the problem of social engineering attacks.  Companies invest tons of resources into finding countermeasures against social engineering attacks.  Another limitation comes with the human-based social engineering attacks.  Since these attacks are more personal unfortunately using technology to pinpoint or help pinpoint possible attacks won’t work well.  So technology will not always help and may never detect the actual threat due to the social engineering attack not being technologically based (10).  

Because it is a global issue, law enforcement will continuously run into challenges when it comes to jurisdictions and boundaries between states and countries.  It is going to be really hard to track and convict a hacker who crosses state or country lines.  This leads to another possible challenge, which includes a possible lack of evidence in order to prosecute these criminals.  Lack of resources and funds also pose as a major challenge when trying to prosecute these kinds of hackers.  Another issue regarding any technical preventions of social engineering attacks is because there has been a lack of technological advances found that would eliminate the risk associated with human error (6).  

Each of the different types of countermeasures will have different limitations.  If you are using an education-based method, then one possible limitation would be the quality of the staff.  Is the staff teaching what it should be and giving out the proper information?  Of course, this gives the same issue mentioned previously, that you would be relying on human skills and those are, as we know, one of the biggest risks when it comes to social engineering attacks.  Also, when it comes to the actual students, it is hard to rely on their adaption to instructions and actually learning the information that is given.  When it comes to training a big limitation comes with financial resources and funding.  If a business, for example, wants to train their employees they would have to pay an instructor, allow employees to lose out on actual working-time, and any sort of training materials or equipment.  Awareness programs to recognize attacks will also cause limitations such as staff negligence, the qualities of the staff, and the outcome from the persuasion of others.  (1).  

There are even limitations that come along with any information security policies that a company or organization puts out for its staff.  Another type of policy includes desk policies or destruction.  This policy may include things such as shredding sensitive paperwork in order to prevent dumpster diving or destroying any classified information.  You may implement this, but it doesn’t necessarily mean that all the employees will follow this strictly.  Some employees may not know what to shred and what doesn’t need to be shredded.  So, the behavior of the staff is considered a big limitation for this policy.  Another policy may focus on sensitive data and limiting accessibility to the data to only authorized personnel to limit data leakage threats.  The problem with this also depends on the compliance of staff and if they implement the limited use of accessibility.  Another policy includes classifications.  The classifications policy will label the levels of data classification.  Unfortunately, if it is not a clear policy statement staff may not understand it completely.  A security audit policy to audit practices by testing the level of staff awareness is another policy that should have some focus.  Unfortunately, this is another policy that depends on the capability and compliance of staff.  Even when it comes to policies regarding new-hires, there may be an issue in the accuracy of background checks or even lack-there-of.  When it comes to physical security, organizations tend to use biometrics for staff to enter the organization or even parts of the organization.  However, this can’t be a 100% fix as biometrics can be hacked.  Even though a lot of these policies have an issue with compliance, you can add a policy about compliance.  Unfortunately for the company, in order to make sure employees are being compliant it would take a lot of time and focus to make sure every single staff member is being compliant with the business’ policies (1)

Even with tools, there are limitations.  If we took away the fact that human-error can be a major limitation when it comes to the use of tools and technological countermeasures, there are limitations within the tools.  You can update network tools but will have an issue relying on routine updates.  You can also use a network-based intrusion detection system that recognizes spammers and fake profiles, but it could fail because the skill-level of your staff will vary from person to person.  Due to social engineering attacks evolving over time and evolving to combat its countermeasures, using biometrics to confirm identities may not be completely reliable as they can be hacked.  A company could use tools of Artificial Intelligence as a countermeasure to social engineering attacks.  A company may introduce artificial intelligence to phishing attacks to identify them before they are launched, for example.  Artificial intelligence is extremely expensive technology, and the financial funding of a company may not be able to implement such a technology.  The company could even use Neuro-Fuzzy to secure online transactions in real time which would be the most helpful depending on the technical knowledge of staff.  Another example is using host-based firewalls or isolating machines as a response to an attack but you need a high tech staff for that to successfully work.  This is the same as using patch management to keep appropriate application patches on normal updates which will also need some highly skilled information technology staff.  Finally, a company can conduct penetration testing regularly to test the vulnerabilities within their systems but if the tests are not correct then they can cause some damage (1)

Through the research that has been read and analyzed, it seems as though a combination of informative information, hands-on experience, and technological back-up would be the best outcome when trying to help people’s vulnerabilities with social engineering attacks.  This paper has gone though many different types of countermeasures that could be implemented to help stop social engineering attacks.  Since human-error is a big issue, it causes a lot of limitations in the process.  Things such as firewalls, virus protection, and other technology-based security tools will help, but it is mostly a “last defense” when the information they had learned and the hands-on experience they were trained with didn’t work.  This is why this problem is not seen as a one countermeasure fixes all type of deal.  You need to treat this as layers of security.  Things should be in place so when one countermeasure fails it will be met with a backup countermeasure.  Throughout this paper it has been found that a combination of countermeasures will work the best in regard to limiting dangers from social engineering attacks.  Education is a big step in this process and should be started at a young age.  Policies implemented by schools or organizations will also hold benefits to give everyone a clear guide of what they should and should not do.  These policies should also be updated frequently.  Organizations would also find it helpful to not only give an initial training and education to everyone but to also give refresher training sessions to make sure all the information they receive stays implemented into their minds.  Education is just one of the steps to educate, though.  A combination of informational education and a hands-on experience, or simulation, may help staff understand easier what is meant by these attacks and will give them an idea of how they are used.  Beyond all these steps, as a last barrier of defense, any technological tools to help against phishing attacks and other social engineering attacks would be a great last-resort defense.  Unfortunately, most people won’t have control in receiving information at a young age till schools start to implement safe cybersecurity practices into curriculum.  In order for countermeasures to work against social engineering attacks you have to use a combination of informational education, hands-on education, refresher training, and also technological tools. 


References
----------
1. Aldawood, H., & Skinner, G. (2019). Contemporary Cyber Security Social Engineering Solutions, Measures, Policies, Tools and Applications: A Critical Appraisal. International Journal of Security (IJS), 10(1), 1.
2. Ammar, J. O., Ismail, K., & Eman, A. (2020). Efficient detection of phishing websites using multilayer perceptron. International Journal of Interactive Mobile Technologies, 14(11), 22–31. https://doi.org/10.3991/ijim.v14i11.13903
3. Aurélien Baillon, Jeroen, de B., Aysil, E., Evelien, van de V., & Bram, van D. (2019). Informing, simulating experience, or both: a field experiment on phishing risks. Plos One, 14(12). https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0224216
4. Breda, F., Barbosa, H., & Morais, T. (2017, March). Social engineering and cyber security. In em Conference: International Technology, Education and Development Conference.
5. Cheung, R. S., Cohen, J. P., Lo, H. Z., & Elia, F. (2011). Challenge based learning in cybersecurity education. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Security and Management (SAM) (p. 1). The Steering Committee of The World Congress in Computer Science, Computer Engineering and Applied Computing (WorldComp).
6. Conteh, N. Y., & Schmick, P. J. (2016). Cybersecurity: risks, vulnerabilities and countermeasures to prevent social engineering attacks. International Journal of Advanced Computer Research, 6(23), 31
7. Greavu-Şerban, V., & Şerban, O. (2014). Social Engineering a General Approach. Informatica Economica, 18(2), 5–14. https://doi-org.baypath.idm.oclc.org/10.12948/issn14531305/18.2.2014.01 
8. Internet Crime Report Released. (2020, February 11). Retrieved December 13, 2020, from https://www.fbi.gov/news/stories/2019-internet-crime-report-released-021120
9. Kelly, T. (2020, June 23). How hackers are using COVID-19 to find new phishing victims. Retrieved December 12, 2020, from https://www.securitymagazine.com/articles/92666-how-hackers-are-using-covid-19-to-find-new-phishing-victims
10. Salahdine, F., & Kaabouch, N. (2019). Social engineering attacks: A survey. Future Internet, 11(4), 89. 
11. Stewart, J. M. (2014). Network Security Threats and Issues. In Network security, firewalls, and VPNs (2nd ed., pp. 111-115). Burlington, MA: Jones & Bartlett Learning.
12. Vigdermon, A. (2020, October 05). COVID-19 Cybercrime and Scams. Retrieved December 12, 2020, from https://www.security.org/digital-safety/covid-scams/
