Post-Mortem Analysis of
=======================
The Cuckoo’s Egg by Cliff Stoll
===============================

This story is about an astronomer, named Cliff Stoll, who worked at a computer manager at Berkley University in the 80’s.  Stoll stumbled upon a small accounting error of 75 cents which led to the discovery of a hacker gang who have infiltrated not only Berkley’s system, but government systems such as the Pentagon and the military bases as well.  They even accessed medical tools which could have had life-altering effects.  After diving into the system Stoll was able to find a hacker who has taken over an old employee’s unused account under the name of Sventek.  He stole old accounts, would change the passwords, and since no one used the accounts then no one would complain that their passwords weren’t working.  Stoll created a monitoring system to see what the hacker is doing by taking all his office’s printers, monitors, and other related equipment.  This system worked like a keylogger and would print up all of the hacker’s activity (1).  

The hacker was working from a privileged account which allowed him to execute a program to grab privileges as well.  The hacker would exploit a Gnu hole and would add a new account to their system.  Stoll’s system became two terminals where an alarm would beep to alert him of a new user.  If the alarm showed that the hacker had shown up, then he would go to the switchyard.  He eventually traded up for a pager that would inform him using morse code if there was an intruder in the system.  Using this system, he would watch the hacker.  One day he finds the hacker using the program Kermit to transfer a program into Berkley’s Unix computer that would trick users into entering their login information for them to obtain that information (1).

During the investigations, the hackers used many routes in their communications that made it hard to track through phone tracing because many of its victims would show up as the sources.  To try and pinpoint where the hacker may be, Stoll found himself using math and counting “echoes” to guess how far away the hacker would be.  Further on, Stoll mentions a company who sold them their computers, but sold them with the security features disabled.  This helped the hacker get through to a supercomputer (1).

Eventually, Stoll started to piece together why the phone traces weren’t panning out. The hacker was making it so other companies, such as Mitre, were paying their telephone bills so any traces would go back to where the bills are sent.  Eventually they pinpointed the hacker to Europe, more specifically, Germany.  Further into the book, Stoll explains how he was watching the hacker when he knew he was going to have to kick him off the network, but in a way where it didn’t look intentional.  He simply shorted out a circuit to boot the hacker and Stoll could continue going undetected.  In another point further in the book, Stoll mentions that the Air Force computer had thrown a warning on their screens to announce that the site will be down for repairs in order to boot the hacker off without knowing he has been detected.   I would continue to think that letting the hacker play around in the system was a bad idea to begin with, but further in this book Stoll finds that the hacker had gained access to current and active accounts, which his set-up wasn’t going to detect (1).

One day, Stoll was watching the hacker and had his mind blown when the hacker gained full control of the Space Command’s computer.  He watched the hacker try a few known passwords to get access.  The system he broke into was the system operator.  Luckily, when the hacker logged off the password changed, and he was unable to get back in because he had missed a warning that popped up about changing the password (1).

Slowly precautions were made throughout the book.  For example, Stoll had made certain the hacker was unable to infiltrate new accounts or create new accounts so he could always see him move around in their system.  Then Stoll had the idea to create a type of honeypot that would lure the hacker in a trap.  He would plant some data that wasn’t legitimate date.  Eventually, the bait was taken.  The trap led to Stoll figuring out that his hacker was mostly likely, hackers.  He would end up learning a group called The Chaos Computer Club would be responsible for everything.  Early on, Stoll suspected that the hackers were using password dictionaries to brute-force their way into accounts.  Stoll began watching the evidence pile-up of exactly that.  He began watching the hacker get rejected from all his previous playgrounds and still manage to guess the new passwords.  He knew the hacker’s expertise was in persistence.  Eventually, all of Stoll’s hard work had come to an end when the hackers were apprehended (1). 

Looking back into the details of this book, there are many things that people did wrong.  First, the Berkley’s system was patched together with poor coding by some college students (1).  With the students long gone, that also showed that the systems were most likely out-of-date.  Poor coding is a constant issue that is the source of many data breaches.  There was also an issue of old accounts in these systems.  The hackers were able to infiltrate by imitating users on the system who were no longer there, such as the Sventek account (1).  If it wasn’t for that 75-cent mistake, Stoll may have never noticed.  So, by now and hopefully continuing, organizations should be certain to close any accounts that don’t need to be there or at least be certain to end their privileges and access.  

A common theme was using poor password practices.  Berkley’s system manager password was “wyvern” which is a dragon (1).  Even now, many people will use simple and easily guessed passwords.  To help with this, there should be strict password policies in place within an organization.  Stoll even mentioned at one point that the password to the system hasn’t been changed in a couple of years (1).  Passwords should be changed regularly to limit the chance of being cracked.  Stoll even mentioned another person in the book who had disabled accounts that weren’t being utilized but left the systems password unchanged which led to further breaches in the system (1).  If there has been a hacker that infiltrated your system, your best bet would be to change everything you can.  Tighten up security in all aspects.  

Stoll also mentions that most Vax-VMS computers all had the general login information of either system/manager, field/service, or user/user (1).  Most people didn’t bother changing that information even though they are persuaded to.  Most systems were wide open.  As mentioned previously with the Space Command computer.  The hacker used the username FIELD and the password SERVICE to gain access (1).  They weren’t the only ones with easy access ways like that.  A stricter policy regarding passwords and logins would have saved a lot of people a lot of trouble if they were implemented early enough.  Passwords are still a big issue today and need to be taken more seriously.  

Another common issue within this book was the lack of people, especially government officials, taking such a serious breach so lightly.  When they realized that the attacker was from Germany, that made things more difficult.  Germany didn’t take hackings very seriously so getting everyone to cooperate was hard enough as it was.  You would see Stoll bounce between agencies such as FBI, CIA, and NSA.  Each agency would just continuously point fingers, and no one would accept responsibility for the breach that Stoll had discovered.  Luckily, it took a lot of pestering and talking to the right people, but they started taking this seriously (1).  The NSA even told Stoll that “Any system can be insecure.  All you have to do is stupidly manage it.” (1).  We have come a long way since then, in respect to laws, policies, and regulations within the cyber-world.  However, there isn’t anything for international issues.  Locally, we still don’t have enough updated laws as it is ourselves.  But it is something that has been working on.  While the government tries to play catch-up to the technologically changing world, every organization should do their part to help secure the cyber-world.  All the mistakes that were brought up in this book, even though it was written in the 80’s, are still issues we deal with today.  

References
----------

Stoll, C. (1989). The Cuckoo's Egg: Tracking a spy through the maze of Computer Espionage. Gallery Books. 
